Nutrient cycling is a key biogeochemical process underlying the functioning of marine ecosystems. Yet, the contribution of fishes is still poorly understood. This is problematic considering the current modifications of fish assemblages experienced in certain regions such as the Mediterranean Sea, and their potential consequences in terms of ecosystem functioning. In this study, we used a mesocosm experiment to test the effect of nutrient recycling by an invasive marine herbivorous fish (*Siganus rivulatus*) on planktonic and benthic microbial communities. The response of these communities was assessed using a variety of analytical approaches such as measures of nutrient concentration, flow cytometry and metabarcoding of the 16S rRNA gene. Our results show that several microbial compartments of marine ecosystems respond to the nutrients released by fish through excretion and egestion. The nutrients contained in the macroalgae consumed by S. rivulatus were excreted in large amounts as dissolved nutrients, which resulted in higher concentrations of N-based nutrients in the water (NH4, NO2/NO3). This excess of N in the system was associated with higher abundances of planktonic microbes (phyto- and bacterioplankton), modifications of the structure of planktonic bacterial communities and the tissue composition of the remaining macroalgae. Non assimilated nutrients were released in the form of feces under the shelters where the fish spent most of their time and defecated during the night, leading to local increases in diversity and significant shifts in the structure of sediment bacterial communities. Overall, our results suggest that the impact of S. rivulatus on planktonic microbes was related to the indirect bottom-up effect induced by excreted nutrients while its effect on benthic microbes wad due to a direct release of microbes from its gut microbiome. This study represents one of the first assessment of the effect of nutrient recycling by fishes on the microbial communities from several compartments of marine ecosystems and one of the first evidence of the invisible effect of invasive species on the microbial components of marine ecosystems.

EXOFISHMED (Agence Nationale de la Recherche, ANR-17-CE32-0003)
https://exofishmed.cnrs.fr/

